The Project Gutenberg EBook of Alphabetical Vocabularies of the Clallum
and Lummi, by George Gibbs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Alphabetical Vocabularies of the Clallum and Lummi

Author: George Gibbs

Release Date: August 3, 2007 [EBook #22228]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARIES ***




Produced by David Starner, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 SHEA'S

 LIBRARY OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS.

 XI.

 AMS PRESS, INC.
 NEW YORK




                  ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARIES

                            OF THE

                      CLALLAM AND LUMMI.

                              BY

                        GEORGE GIBBS.



 PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION.



                          NEW YORK:
                       CRAMOISY PRESS.
                            1863.




 Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer errors have been corrected. All
 other inconsistencies are as in the original. The following less common
 diacritical marks have been transcribed as follows:

 [=a] a with macron
 [=e] e with macron
 [=o] o with macron
 [=u] u with macron

 [)a] a with breve
 [)e] e with breve
 [)u] u with breve

 [oe] oe ligature

 ^ is used to indicate 'superscript'


 A table of contents, though not present in the original, has been
 provided below:


   Preface

   Vocabulary of the Clallam
   A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, W, Y.

   Local Nomenclature of the Clallam Tribe

   Vocabulary of the Lummi
   A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, U, W, Y.

   Local Nomenclature of the Lummi Tribe

   Names of Lummi Chiefs




PREFACE.


The tribe of Clallams, as they are usually called by the residents of
Washington Territory--by the neighboring Indians named S'klal´am, and
denominated by themselves N[=u]s-klái y[=u]m--inhabit the southern shore
of Fuca Strait, from about the Ok[)e]ho River on the west, to Port
Townshend on the east, bordering in the first direction on the Makahs,
sometimes called Classets (the Klaizzart of Jewitt), a tribe of the
Nootka family who inhabit Cape Flattery, and in the other on the
Chemakum, like themselves a branch of the Selish, though a yet more
remote one. Their language is the same, with some dialectic differences
only, as that of the Songhus and Sokes of Vancouver Island opposite. It
is this which has been referred to by Drs. Scouler and Latham as the
"Nusdalum," undoubtedly, in the first instance, a misprint.

The Clallam differs materially from the other Selish languages of the
Puget Sound country, though less from the Lummi than the rest. Its
noticeable feature is the frequent occurrence of the nasal _ng_.

The Lummi tribe live on the lower part of a river heading in the Cascade
Range, north-east of Mount Baker, and emptying by two mouths, one into
Bellingham Bay, the other into the Gulf of Georgia, the upper waters of
which are inhabited by the Nook-sahks (N[=u]k-sák). They are, however,
intruders here, their former country having been a part of the group of
islands between the continent and Vancouver Island, to which they still
occasionally resort. Their own name is N[=u]kh´lum-mi. The Skagits call
them N[=u]kh-lésh, and some of the other tribes Há-lum-mi. Their
dialectic affinities are rather with the Sannitch of the south-eastern
end of Vancouver Island than with any of the Indians of the main land,
and the two probably at one period formed a single tribe, which more
remotely was connected with the Clallams and Songhus. The Simiahmoo
(Si-mi-á-mu), a small remnant, living on the bay of that name, north of
them, belong likewise to this group. On the south the Lummi adjoin the
Samish and other bands of the Skagits, who in language approach the
Nisquallies.

Like the Clallam, their language abounds with the nasal _ng_, both as a
prefix and a termination. It has another peculiarity, in great measure
its own, in the broad sound of the letter _a_, somewhat as in the words
_mass_, _pass_, but even more prolonged. I have distinguished this in
the vocabulary by the italic. The letters _f_, _r_, _v_, _z_, are
wanting in both languages.

The Clallam and Lummi, as will be observed, contain three classes of
cardinals, which I have distinguished as _simple_, _personal_, and of
_valuation_, although these terms are not strictly accurate; certain
objects, besides men, being counted by the second, and others, as well
as money, by the third; I have never fully ascertained the distinctions
which govern their use. The words _animate_ and _inanimate_ do not
apply; those of _noble_ and _ignoble_, by which the French Missionaries
designated the names of objects in the Algonquin languages, probably
indicate the idea. Mr. Gallatin, in his "Notes on the Semi-Civilized
Nations of Mexico," &c.,[A] mentions the same peculiarity as existing in
the Mexican and Maya, in the former of which there are three different
terminations suffixed to the simple numbers, according to the objects
denoted. A similar distinction is found in the Makak language, and
traces of it, at least, are observable in the Pima. I imagine that by
inquiry the fact would be found to exist in other Indian tongues.
Singularly enough, this feature also characterizes some of the languages
of Micronesia.

[A] Trans. Am. Eth. Soc., vol, i., p. 54.

The affinities of the Clallam and Lummi with the Selish are too obvious
to require demonstration. Indeed Dr. Latham has already classed the
former with the Shewhapmukh, or, as he terms it, Atna, of Frazer River,
the northernmost of the Selish dialects. The term Atna, it may be
mentioned, is improperly applied as a family name to these languages, as
it is a Tákulli (Athabascan or Chepewyan) word, signifying, according to
Mr. A. C. Anderson, "strangers."

These two vocabularies were collected, the first at Port Townshend,
during a residence of a few months, the other at Simiámoo Bay, while I
was connected with the N. W. Boundary Commission. Neither of them
underwent more than a partial revision, and inaccuracies have therefore
doubtless crept in. They are, however, sufficiently reliable to afford
the basis of extending comparisons with the other Selish and the more
northern coast families.

Transcriber's Note: For greater legibility the letters originally marked
as _a_ and _u_ have been replaced with ä and ü in the vocabularies,
except where this would cause a conflict with an existing diacritical.




 VOCABULARY OF THE CLALLAM.


 A.

 ABOVE, tsits-itl.

 ABOARD, si-it-hwu.

 AFRAID, sá-si-si.

 AGAIN, hon-áng.

 ALIVE, é-yé.

 ALL, o-hün´na;
   _that's all_, aukhk.

 ALWAYS, wút-an-su;
   _I always work_, wút-an-su chá-ai.

 ANKLE, tsüts-hó-kwi-sun.

 ARRIVE _at_, _to_, tüss´tsen.

 ARM, tsái-is.

 ARROW, yetcht.

 ARROW HEAD, _of wood_, katstl;
   _of iron_, küm-tin-ái-in; (küm-tüm, _iron_.)

 AUTUMN, tchin-sót-le.

 AXE, s'k[=u]k-üm´.


 B.

 BACK, _the_, stets-i´kwün.

 BAD, kwaukh, s'há-as.

 BARBERRY, "_Oregon grape_" (_berberis_), she´tchin.

 BARBS _of fish spear_, tsó-kwái-ten.

 BARK, chai-íkh.

 BARNACLE, tsóhngt.

 BAT, klat-li-pi-á-han.

 BASKET, mo-hói;
   _cedar bark_, t'shó-ikl;
   _fir root_, sp'chu.

 BEACH, kokh-hwéng-u.

 BEADS, kwé-kwe.

 BEAR, _black_, s'chi-kwáitsh;
   _grizzly_, kwái-it-shin.

 BEAVER, ské-yau.

 BEARD, kwün-tsen.

 BEHIND, il-kwá-us.

 BERRIES (_generic_), s'chá-yük-w'tl.

 BILBERRY, yé-hum.

 BIRDS:
   Sea ducks (_generic_), mó-[=o]k.
   Small land birds (_generic_), tsit-süm.
   Crane, si-é-hu.
   Crow, skwa-kwa´to.
   Duck, mallard (_a. boschas_), te´nük-sen.
   Duck, surf (_f. perspicillata_), klé-yin.
   Duck, velvet (_f. fusca_), ko-mat´sin-hlai.
   Duck, harlequin (_f. histrionica_), süs-sáu.
   Duck, scaup (_f. marila_), swét-st.
   Duck, goosander (_m. merganser_), ko-[=o]kw.
   Eagles, bald (_Haliaetus_), kwái-eng-s'n.
   Eagles, golden (_Aquila_), ku-táit-sin-hu.
   Goose, yükh-hó-na.
   Guillemot, sas-sé-mats.
   Gulls, kwun-né, ku-té-ük.
   Grebes, kla-ái-kun.
   Grouse, dusky, gné-et.
     ruffed, sté-yu-h[=u]ng.
   Heron, sn[=o]k-ho.
   Jay, s'háikh-hai.
   Pigeon, hüm-ókh.
   Raven, sku-to´.
   Sandpipers, ske´üks.

 BLACK, ün-ük-áikh, an-nu-káikh.

 BLANKET, swi´shi-atl;
   _of dog's hair_, sküm-éng-ütl.

 BLOOD, stó-yu-küm.

 BLUE, küs-küs-sho´it, an-nu-kwé-o.

 BOARD, se-y't-hu.

 BODY, ni-chi-chái-ten, n's-tats-kl.

 BODY, _parts of_:
   Head, sk[=u]ng-i.
   Hair, si-at´t'n.
   Face, sats.
   Ear, skong´üs.
   Eye, kái-in.
   Nose, nük´s'n.
   Mouth, tsú-ts'n.
   Tongue, tikh´wh'lts.
   Teeth, tchin´nis.
   Beard, kwün-[=u]t-s'n.
   Neck, h[=o]ng-en.
   Arm, tsái-'s.
   Elbow, sk[=o]p-hai.
   Wrist, s'h[=o]ts-kwats.
   Hand, s'ch-hats´.
   Fingers, s'ch-hats´.
   Nails, ts-sh[=u]ts.
   Breast or Chest, tsüng-ütl.
   Woman's Bosom, sküb-ó.
   Back, stets´i-kwün.
   Leg, s'hün-na.
   Ankle, tuts-hó-kwi-sun.
   Foot, kl-tá-s'n.
   Toes, kl-tá-s'n.
   Bone, st-zum.
   Heart, ha-chin-nin´.
   Blood, sto´yu-kün.
   Skin, kó-wi.
   Penis, shel´la.
   Testes, ng-at'sün.

 BOIL, _to_, kwái-yis.

 BONE, st-zum.

 BORE A HOLE, _to_, t'slük´wüt.

 BOTH, chá-sa.

 BOW, s'ho´mo-ten.

 BOW-STRING, sul-kwá-tchin.

 BOY, swé-wa-[=u]s, scha-chi-aitl.

 BRACELETS, tso´me-chin.

 BREAK, _to_, ti-kwüt´.

 BREASTS _of woman_, sküb-ó.

 BRING, _to_, an-ákh´w;
   _bring that_, (_imp._) an-akhw ta-sái-ya.

 BROAD, kl-k_ú_t.

 BROTHER, _elder_, s[=u]t-hó-nük;
   _younger_, sái-tchin.

 BUCKET, skó-tün.

 BUFFALO, kwáisp.

 BUY, _to_, tá-kws.

 BURYING GROUND, má-kwa.

 BYE AND BYE, hets.


 C.

 CANOE, _Chinook pattern_, o-ót-hüs;
   _Cowitshin do._, sté-watl;
   _ducking canoe_, sno'h-wh'l.

 CARRY, _to_, óng-üt-un.

 CARPENTER, _worker in wood_, skai-án-hwu.

 CATCH, _to_, kl-kw_ú_t.

 CEDAR _bark_, si-ó-we;
   _wood_, ts-shái.

 CHEST _or breast_, _the_, tsüng´ütl;
   _chest_ (_box_), kló-yüks.

 CHIEF, si-ám.

 CHOP, _to_, kum-müt´.

 CLAM, _quahog_ (_Venus_), ski-hé-yu;
   _the large kind_ (_lutraria_), swá-hüm;
   _blue striated species_, skük-lái.

 CLOUDS, s'hu-nó-wüs.

 COCKLE, sklé-y[=o]m.

 COD FISH, s'ká-kan.

 COLD, klá-tchi.

 COLORS:
   White, pük'h.
   Red, ün-tsükw´, an-nu-tsük´o.
   Black, ün-ük-aikh, an-nu-káikh.
   Blue, küs-küs-sho´it, an-nu-kwhé-o.
   Yellow, nüts-kwai-ye´win, an-nu-kwái-kwai.
   Green, ün-tlütlkh, an-nu-klikh´tl.

 COMB, kl-sing´en.

 COME, _to_, en-át-sen;
   _I come_, an-ná;
   _come you_ (_imp._) an-ná-chi.

 COOK ON STONES, _to_, n[=u]tch-kwé-nütl.

 COPULATE, _to_, kwat'tl.

 CORPSE, kó-i.

 COUGAR, kau-ét-sap.

 CUP, mét-kw.

 CUTTLE FISH, ské-mükw.

 CRAB, a-ché-he.

 CRANE, si-é-hu.

 CROW, skwa-kwá-to.

 CRY, _to_, h[=o]ng.


 D.

 DANCE, _to_, kwoi-é-ish-ten.

 DARKNESS, s'chät.

 DAUGHTER (_child_), nüng-ün´na.

 DAY, skwá-tchi.

 DEAD, kó-i.

 DEAD LAND (_country of the dead_), snó-nükw.

 DEEP, kletch.

 DEER, h[=o]pt, smé-yis.

 DEMON (_the primal race_), s'hui-áb.

 DIG, _to_, tsé-yükwt;
   _dig out_, _to_, (_e.g. a canoe_), ká-hai-yu.

 DO, _to_, chá-ai.

 DOG, ská-ha; _plur._ ska-yá-ha.

 DOG FISH, s'kwats.

 DOOR, so'tl.

 DOWN STREAM, kwó-kw[)u].

 DREAM, _to_, (_1st pers. ind._) kwi-nóng-tüt-sen.

 DRINK, _I_, ko-kwát-sen; (ko, _water_.)

 DRIVE, _to_, kwi-hüt´l.

 DRUNK (_i.e. foolish_), as-hwá-kwu.

 DRY, há-ching.

 DUCK (_mallard_), té-nük-sen.

 DULL, n'ko-m[=u]kh.

 DUNG, _to_, ká-ang.


 E.

 EAR, kwái-in.

 EARTH, _land_, sh-stüng´a-whün.

 EAGLE, _bald_, kwái-eng-s'n;
   _golden_, ku-táit-sin-hu.

 EAT, _to_, ts-kwin-sünt-sen, it-lun.

 ECHINUS, skwét-si.

 EGGS, sing-i-á-net.

 EIGHT, tats, tats-sái-ya, tats-háit-hu.

 ELBOW, sk[=o]p-hái-al-ka.

 ELK, kai-yétsh.

 END _or point_, elks.

 EVENING, táng-en.

 EYE, kái-in.

 EXCHANGE, _to_, at-shé-ti.


 F.

 FACE, sats.

 FAR, yé-ye, he-eh.

 FATHER, i-ái-in;
   _grandfather_, sé-ya.

 FEATHERS, s'chái.

 FIND, _to_, chó-nüt-sen.

 FINISH, _I have finished work_, ho-its´na kwin's chái.

 FINGERS, s'ch-hats.

 FIR TREE (_abies Douglassii_), skai-ái-nükh, chi-á-chitch;
   _fir bark_, tsi´yi.

 FIRE, só-n[=u]ts.

 FIRE WOOD, tl-káts.

 FIRST, i-chá-yi.

 FISH, tsâ'kw.

 FISH, ETC.:
   Cod fish, s'ká-kan.
   Crab, a-ché-e.
   Cuttle fish, ské-mükw.
   Dog fish, s'kwats.
   Flounder, hwau-kwün.
   Halibut, s'h[=o]t'h.
   Herring, kl[=o]ngt.
   Oulakan, kláis.
   Porpoise, s'hú-ma-hens.
   Salmon (_See "salmon"_).
   Sculpin, swan-itl.
   Shark, klá-yük-a-tét-s'n.
   Sturgeon, kw'táit-sin.
   Toad fish, s'chem-ükh.

 FISH GIG, sti-é-hu.

 FISHING LINE _of kelp_, schats.

 FISH _with a line_, _to_, tl-ti-ó-is.

 FISH WEIR, su-ta-t'hl.

 FIVE, kl-katcht, kl-küt-shái-ya, kl-küt-sháit'hu.

 FLESH, sli-ükw´.

 FLOUNDER, _flatfish_, hwau-kwün.

 FLY, _the insect_, kli-kái-a-hün-na.

 FOOT, kl-tá-sn.

 FOUR, ng-os, ni-sai-ya, nu-sáit-hu.

 FORMERLY, _a long time ago_, h[=e]ts.

 FROM, tó-k[=u]t-s'n.

 FULL, es-si-át-st'l.


 G.

 GAFF, _for salmon_, kle-kwün.

 GAMBLING DISKS, sla-hal´lüm.

 GET UP, _to_, tsát-lüng.

 GIRL, slet-lát-li-ke.

 GIVE, _to_, ang-at.

 GO, _I_, (_1st pers. pres. ind._) hai-át-sen;
   _go_ (_imp._) óh'chi;
   _I go there_, [=o]ts-na tá-sái-ya.

 GOAT (_aploceras_), shwét-le.

 GOOD, áikh, hatl;
   _good so_ (_that's well_), ái-yu-hó-nang;
   _good man_, ais swé-ka;
   _good dog_, ais ká-ha.

 GOOSANDER (_mergus merganser_), ho-[=o]k'w.

 GOOSE, yükh´ho-na.

 GRANDFATHER, sé-ya, tchütt.

 GRANDMOTHER, sé-ya.

 GRASS, s'hats-ai;
   _mat grass for thread_, klütl.

 GREASE _or oil_, smüts.

 GREBE (_podiceps_), kla-ái-kün.

 GREEN, ün-tl_ú_tlh, an-nu-klikhtl.

 GROUSE (_tetrao obscurus_), gné-et;
   (_tetrao umbellus_), ste´yu-h[=u]ng.

 GUILLEMOT, sas-sé-mats.

 GULL, ku-té-ük, kwün-né.

 GUM, _pitch_, tché-ükh.


 H.

 HAIL, chit-la-hái-sin.

 HAIR, si-at´tn.

 HAIQUA (_the dentalium_), klets´-chin.

 HALF, il-chukh´.

 HALIBUT, s'h[=o]t'h, ts[=o]t'h.

 HAND, s'ch-hats´.

 HARD, ko-sang´.

 HARE, _rabbit_, ka-káit-se.

 HAUL, _to_, ho-kwut´.

 HAT, s'ches´euk'h.

 HE, _when present_, tsa-mukw;
   _if absent_, netl.

 HEAD, sk[=u]ng-i.

 HEAR, _I_, yai-yá-nüng-sen.

 HEART, ha-chin-nin´.

 HERE, te-at´hla.

 HERON (_ardea herodias_), sn[=o]k-ho.

 HERRING, kl[=o]ngt.

 HIDE, _to_, kwai's.

 HIT, _I_, tcho´kwe-n[=u]t-sen.

 HOLLA, _to_, kwá-kwüt-ching.

 HOW MANY? kwén-chis;
   _how many people?_ ko-nái-ya;
   _how many dollars?_ ko-nai chis ngün _dolla_;
   _how much money have you?_ ko-nai te chin _dolla_.

 HOUSE, ái-yüng;
   _my house_, n'skwai, te ai-yüng.

 HUNDRED, na-tcho-wütsh.

 HUNGRY, hwam.

 HUSBAND, _my_, n'swé-i-ka.


 I.

 I, ütza.

 ICE, sle´a-hu.

 INDIANS, _people_, tl-stái-ing-hu, ats-il-tái-ing-hu.

 INFANT, s'chá-in.

 IRON, küm-tüm´.

 ISLAND, kl-chás.


 J.

 JAY (_garrulus stelleri_), s'háikh-hai.

 JUST NOW, _lately_, chatsh´ta;
   _I have just come_ chatsh-ta't n's-ta´chi.


 K.

 KAMASS, k'whló-i.

 KETTLE, skwó-ten.

 KILL, _to_, ko-ché-yu.

 KNEE, skai-yá-ko.

 KNIFE, _sheath_, ko-kwái-is;
   _pocket_, náng-nün.

 KNOW, _I_, hüt-chét 't-sen.


 L.

 LAKE, tsé-ikhtl.

 LARGE, tchük.

 LATELY, _just now_, chátsh-ta.

 LAUGH, _to_, net´ching.

 LAZY, tsá-h[=u]ng.

 LEAF, s'chá-sün.

 LEAP, _to_, hwé-tüng.

 LEG, s'hün´na.

 LIE, _to_, kai-yükh´.

 LIGHT, wái-yu.

 LIGHTNING, chin-é-kwa.

 LIKE, hon-áng.

 LISTEN (_imp._), yá-ya-nüng-[=o]ts-hu.

 LONG, klakt;
   _long ago_, hets.

 LOOK FOR, _to_, kli-yáng.

 LOSE, _to_, tsits-hwá-nüng.

 LOVE, _to_, nus-klé.

 LOW TIDE, süng-[=o]t-sen.

 LYNX (_L. fasciata_), tsát-sats.


 M.

 MALLARD, _duck_, té-nük-sen.

 MAMMALS:
   Bat, klat-li-pi-á-hün.
   Bear, black, s'chi-kwáitsh.
   Bear, grizzly, kwái-it-shin.
   Beaver, ské-yau.
   Buffalo, kwáisp.
   Cougar, kan-et´sap.
   Deer, h[=o]pt, smé-yis.
   Dog, ská-ha.
   Elk, kai-yétsh.
   Goat, mountain, swét-le.
   Hare, rabbit, ka-káit-se.
   Lynx, tsat-sats.
   Mink, mis-tcho.
   Mouse, skwa´tün.
   Musk rat, skülkh-küt'lkh.
   Land otter, ska´atl.
   Sea otter, tüm´müs.
   Seal, äss´hu.
   Skunk, smat-s'n.
   Squirrel (_sciurus_), sp-si-y[=u]t-s'n;
     (_tamias_), ha-hái-yu-wetsh.
   Wolf, sta´ching.
   Whale, ch-whé-yu.

 MAN, swé-ka; _plur._ swé-yi-ka;
   _young man_, swé-w[=u]s;
   _old man_, kwilt-chák.

 MANY, ng' _ú_nn;
   _many men_, ng' üngt' swé-yi-ka.

 MAT, _of round rushes_ (_tulé_), taks-lats´hu;
   _flat do._ (_cat's tail_), su-ya-átsh, kai-nim;
   _cedar bark_, tsüm´müt.

 MAT NEEDLE, ho-k'h_ú_n.

 MEDICINE, s'tái-ing-hu.

 MEDICINE MAN, _magician or doctor_, s'hu-n[=a]m.

 MIDDLE, ets-tóng-en.

 MILK, sküb-ó.

 MINK, mis´tcho.

 MISS _a mark_, _to_, tang-ün;
   _miss the road_, _to_, ti-tákh.

 MISTAKE, _to_, _in speech_, ti-takh.

 MOCCASINS, klük´shin.

 MOLLUSCS, ETC.:
   Barnacle, ts[=o]ngt.
   Clams, quahog (_Venus_), ski-he-yu;
     large (_Lutraria_), swa´-hüm;
     blue striated, skük-hlái.
   Cockle (_cardium_), sklé-y[=o]m.
   Hai-kwa (_Dentalium_), klets-chin.
   Mussel, to´yük.
   Oyster, klokh-klokh.
   Scallop (_pecten_), na´na.
   Sea egg (_echinus_), skwét-si.

 MOON, kl-káitsh.

 MORNING, kwá-tchi.

 MOSQUITO, pwáik-sen.

 MOTHER, t[=a]n.

 MOUNTAIN, h'kwi-étsh.

 MOUSE, skwá-tün.

 MOUTH, tsu´ts'n.

 MUSK RAT, skülkh-küt'lkh.

 MUSSEL, _the small blue_, to´yük.

 MY SISTER, na ais;
   _my house_, na ai-yüng;
   _my things_, n's-kwâ-na-akw.

 MYTHOLOGY:
   Nó-kwe-m[)a]tl _or_ Dó-kwe-b[)a]tl, _the principal supernatural being,
       corresponding to_ Ikáni _of the Chinooks_.
   S'hui-áb, _the primal or demon race_.
   S'hu-n[=a]m, _magic or medicine_.
   Te-y[=u]tl-ma, _the genius of good fortune_.
   Hun-ha-né-ti, _a performance of conjuring or "tamá-nous" (Chinook), known
       to the Nisquallies as_ s'hí-na, _in which it is pretended that the
       person initiated is killed and then restored to life_.


 N.

 NAME, s'dá.

 NAILS, ts´sh[=u]ts.

 NEAR, klat-lé-a-ke.

 NEEDLE, chát-sün.

 NECK, h[=o]ng-en.

 NEW, háu-us, k'hau-ós.

 NIGHT, s'nat´.

 NINE, t[=o]kw, t'kwái-ya, t'kwáit-hu.

 NONE, á-wün-na, au-wüts-an.

 NOON, k'é-yit.

 NOSE, nük'sn.

 NOW, ti-á-no.

 NUMERALS:
   _Simple Cardinals--_
     1, nit´zo.
     2, chis´sa.
     3, klekhw.
     4, ng-os.
     5, kl-katcht
     6, t'hung.
     7, ts[=o]ks.
     8, tats.
     9, t[=o]kw.
     10, ó-pen.

   _Personal Cardinals--_
     1, nát-so.
     2, chá-sa.
     3, kl-whái-ya.
     4, ni-sái-ya.
     5, kl-küt-shái-ya.
     6, tükh-üng-ái-ya.
     7, tsakw-tsái-ya.
     8, tats-sái-ya.
     9, t'kwái-ya.
     10, o-pen-ái.

   _Cardinals of Valuation--_
     1, n'sakt´hu.
     2, n'sháit-hu.
     3, kl-wháit-hu.
     4, nu-sáit-hu.
     5, kl-küt-sháit-hu.
     6, tükh-hüng-áit-hu.
     7, tsak-sáit-hu.
     8, tats-háit-hu.
     9, t-kwáit-hu.
     10, o-pen-áit-hu.
     11, o-pen it nitzo.
     12, o-pen i'tchüs-sa.
     20, t's-kwüss.
     30, h'l-l[=u]tl-sha.
     100, na-tcho-wütsh.
     1000, p'né-itsh.


 O.

 OLD, snük-ai.

 OLD MAN, kwil´tchük;
   _old woman_, kwil´tchük slá-ni.

 ONE, nit´zo, nat´so, n'sákt-hu.

 OTTER, _land_, ská-atl;
   _sea_, tüm´-mus.

 OULAKAN, _a small fish_, klais.

 OUT DOORS, as-saktl´.

 OYSTER, klókh-klokh.

 OFF SHORE, tsát-so.


 P.

 PADDLE, _a_, h[=o]ng-üt.

 PADDLE, _to_, ist.

 PEOPLE, tl-stái-ing-hu, ats-il-tái-ing-hu.

 PENIS, shel´la.

 PIGEON, hüm-ókh.

 PIPE, pá-akw.

 PITCH, tché-ük.

 PLANK, sé-y't-hu.

 PLANTS, ETC.:
   Barberry (_berberis_), shé-tchin.
   Berries (_generic_), s'chá-yük-w'tl.
   Bilberry, yé-hun.
   Grass, s'hats-ái.
     used for mat thread, klütl.
   Kamass (_squilla_), k'whló-i.
   Rush, cat-tail, kwo-[=o]t.
   Sallal (_Gualtheria_), tak´a.
   Salmon berry, al-e´lo.
   Strawberry, té-yükw.
   Tobacco, smá-nash.

 POINT _or end_, elk'hs.

 POUND, _to_, _as grain_, tsüt.

 POUR, _to_, kwi-yet´.

 PORPOISE, s'h[=u]-ma-héns.

 PRAIRIE, spelh´han.

 PREGNANT, as-kwá-kwai.

 PRESENTLY, kwa-kwát-hu.

 PRONOUNS:
   I, _absolute_, üt´za;
     _copulative, prefixed to a verb_, ats;
     _suffixed to do._, sün, sen, sin.
   My, na, n's, n, n'skwai.
   Thou, nükw;
     _copulative prefixed_, chin;
     _suffixed_, hu;
     _or in the imperative_, chi.
   He, _if present_, tsa-nükw;
     _absent_, netl.
   We, nüng'l, kl-ning´ütl.
   Ye, nükw, kl-nükw.
   They, kwas´sa, tsâ-ta.

 PRONGS OF FISH GIG, sta-whái-üts.

 PUSH, _to_, ch[=o]ng-üt.


 Q.

 QUICK, _come quick!_ á-atl.


 R.

 RAIN, _to_, s'lem´hu.

 RAKE, _v._, _to take small fish with a rake_, tlüt´a-men.

 RAVEN, sku-tó.

 RED, ün-tsükw´, an-nu-tsük´o.

 RELATIONS, nis-chá-cha.

 RELATIONSHIPS:
   Father, i-ái-in.
   Mother, tan.
   Grandfather, sé-ya, tchüt.
   Grandmother, sé-ya.
   Son, my, nüng-ün´na.
   Daughter, my, nüng-ün´na.
   Husband, my, n'swé-yi-ka.
   Wife, my, n'slá-ni.
   Brother, elder, s[=u]t-hó-nük.
     younger, sái-tchin.
   Sister, elder, s[=u]t-hó-nük.
     younger, ais.

 RETURN, _to_, ho-wé-yüng.

 RHODODENDRON, kwalt-héltsh.

 RIVER, stó-a-wi.

 ROAST, _by the fire_, chük-[=o]ts.

 ROPE, hwé-lüm.

 ROTTEN, _as wood_, tsá-kong;
   _as fruit_, skwâng´ütst.

 RUSH, _cat-tail_, kwo-[=o]t.

 RUN, _I_, skwá-nüng-üt´sen.


 S.

 SALLAL BERRIES, ták-a.

 SALMON:
   _S. quinnat_, kwit´shin.
   _S. truncatus_, klüt´shin.
   _S. Scouleri_, kütch´küs.
   _S. proteus_, hün´nün.
   _S. (undetermined)_, mét-hlets.
   _S. canis_, kl'whái.
   _S. Campbelli_, kwatcht.

 SALMON ROE, kai-yükh´.

 SALMON BERRIES, al-é-lo.

 SALT, klatl.

 SAND, pe-kwüt-chin.

 SAND PIPER (_tringa_), ské-uks.

 SCALLOP (_pecten_), ná-na.

 SCULPIN, swan-itl.

 SEA, kl-lalts.

 SEA FOWL, mó-[=o]k.

 SEAL, äss´hu.

 SEAL'S BLADDER, ts-só.

 SEASONS:
   Spring, tclin-es-hwó-as.
   Summer, kla-té-küm, tchin-é-si.
   Autumn, tchin-só-le.
   Winter, klá-tchi.

 SEAT, _the_, kló-wük.

 SEE, _to_, kwün't.

 SEVEN, ts[=o]ks, tsäkw-tsái-ya, tsäk-sáit-hu.

 SEW, _to_, chit-seng-üt-sen.

 SEINE, so-yük.

 SHADOW, nu-kwá-ku-no-sing, ká-katl.

 SHARK, klá-yük-a-tét-s'n.

 SHARP, ái-y[=u]ts.

 SHIRT, sli-pói-küt;
   _woollen do._, sno-wéks.

 SHOES, kwüt-lé-shin.

 SHOULDER, tsé-a-kwün.

 SHORT, chái-yetl.

 SICK, as-hátl'h;
   _I am sick_, as-hátl'h-sen.

 SING, _to_, te-yüm´tsen.

 SISTER, _elder_, s[=u]t-hó-nük;
   _do. younger_, ais.

 SIT, _to_, á-müt.

 SIX, t'hüng, tükh-hüng-ái-ya, tükh-hüng-áit-hu.

 SKATE, _fish_, ká-kaukh.

 SKUNK, smát-s'n.

 SKY, tsit-sl.

 SKIN, kó-wi.

 SLAVE, skwé-its.

 SLEEP, _to_, et-tüt-sen.

 SMALL, kl[=o]t-la, ma-má-min.

 SMOKE, sp-k[=o]ng.

 SNAKE, swa-hüt-si.

 SNEEZE, _to_, há-süng.

 SQUIRREL (_Sciurus_), sp'si´yut-sen;
   (_Tamias_), ha-hái-yu-wetsh.

 SPEAK, _to_, kwái-it-sen.

 SPEAR FISH, _to_, te-chut.

 SPEAR, _pronged, for birds_, tsó-kwün, s'h[=o]m.

 SPLIT, chá-y[=u]ts.

 SPOON, klä-müks.

 SPRING, chin-es-hwó-as.

 STAND, _to_, tsit-lüng.

 STAR, te-tó-se-na.

 STEAL, _to_, kan.

 STONE, s'nangt.

 STOP, hó-i;
   _stop talking_ (_imp._), süm-mó'h-tchi.

 STORY, yét-süm.

 STRANGER, natsh.

 STRAWBERRIES, té-yükw.

 STRIKE, _to_, kó-cht.

 STRONG, küm-küm´.

 STURGEON, kw'táit-sin.

 SUN, s[=u]-shát'sht.

 SUMMER, kla-té-küm, tchin-é-si.

 SURF, skw-lai-yá-kan.

 SWIM, _to_, tüng-[=o]ng.


 T.

 TAKE, _to_, kl-kwüt´.

 TEETH, tchin´nis.

 TELL THE TRUTH, _to_ (_1st pers._), as-klá'w-chin skwai.

 TEN, ó-pen, ó-pen-ai, ó-pen-áit-hu.

 TESTICLES, ng'át-sün.

 THAT THING (_the there_), ta-sái-ya.

 THERE, ta-sái-ya;
   _I go there_, [=o]ts-na ta-sái-ya.

 THEY, kwas´sa, tsâ-ta.

 THICK, _as a plank_, ch'hlüt´.

 THIN, _as paper_, chá-chüm-é.

 THIRSTY, _I am_, kwa-kwái-ing-sen.

 THOU, nükw.

 THOUSAND, p'ne´itsh.

 THREE, klekhw, kl-hwái-ya, kl-hwáit-hu.

 THROW AWAY, _to_, kwá-nüs.

 THUNDER, áts-a-kwütl.

 TIDE, _high_, tüng;
   _low_, süng-[=o]t-sen.

 TIE, _to_, ké-a-küt.

 TOAD FISH (_cottus_), s'chem-[=u]k'h.

 TOBACCO, smá-nash.

 TO-DAY, te-a-skwá-tchi, ai-é-nük.

 TOES, kl-tá-s'n.

 TOGETHER, _two_, chá-sa.

 TO-MORROW, kwá-tchi.

 TO-NIGHT, as-nat´.

 TONGUE, tikh´hw'lts.

 TOWARDS SHORE, chái-yükw.

 TRAIL _or road_, so'tl.

 TREE, ski-kai-ái-yu.

 TRENCHER _or wooden dish_, klo-tá.

 TROUT, k'hu-má-mün.

 TROWSERS, no-sün´ten.

 TRUE, as-klá-wtl.

 TWO, chis´sa, chá-sa, n'sháit-hu.


 U.

 UNDER, ki-tchá-wtl.

 UNDERSTAND, _do you?_ hüt-chit´[=u]ts-hu.

 UP, té-yit.

 UPSET, kwái-kwi.


 W.

 WALK, _to_, shtüng.

 WANT, _to_, n[=u]s-klé.

 WARM, kla-té-kün.

 WARRIOR, ns'cháng-kün.

 WASH _the face_, _to_, n[=u]t-sá-ko-sen;
   _wash the clothes_, _to_, tsa-kwéng-ütl.

 WATER, ko.

 WATERFALL, tsét-sil-stó-a-wi.

 WAVES, n'kái-nükh, s'chó-ilts.

 WE, kl-ning´ütl.

 WEIR, _for fish_, sw'klátl.

 WHALE, ch'whé-yu.

 WHAT? stang;
   _what do you want?_ stang chins-klé;
   _what are you doing?_ stang chin-chái;
   _what is your name?_ stang chins-ná;
   _what is that?_ stang ta-sái-ya.

 WHERE? ta-hén;
   _where do you come from?_ cha-hén-tin stá-chi;
   _where do you go?_ twénts-hu.

 WHISTLE, _to_, n[=u]s-kwi-ó-süng.

 WHITE, pük'h.

 WHITE MEN, hwa-né-tüm.

 WHO? tsan;
   _who is that?_ tsan ta-sái-ya.

 WIND, s't'ch[=u]ng;
   _North wind_, kais-hwu;
   _South wind_, skangt, skang´üt.

 WIFE, _my_, n-slá-a-ni.

 WINGS, skl-kái-ai.

 WINTER, klá-chi.

 WITHIN, _inside_, es-ché-yu.

 WOLF, stá-ching.

 WOMAN, sla-ni.

 WOOD, _dead_, kwüt-lái.

 WORK OR DO, _to_, chai;
   _I work_, ats chái _or_ cháit-sen;
   _thou workest_, nük'w chái _or_ chái-üts-hu;
   _he works_, kw'sá chai;
   _we work_, nüng'l tsá-chái;
   _ye work_, nük'w't-sa ái-a-chái;
   _they work_, tsâ-tsa chi´chai.

 WORTHLESS, tl-whí-os.

 WRIST, s'h[=o]ts-kwats.

 WRITE, s'hé-ikh.


 Y.

 YAWN, _to_, wé-uks.

 YE, kl-nükw´;
   _all ye_, nükw´ hün´na.

 YELLOW, an-nu-kwái-kwai.

 YES, a-áh.

 YESTERDAY, chí-ak-kl.

 YOUNG MAN, swé-wus.

 YOUR, n'skwa;
   _your house_, n'skwa n'ái-yüng.




 LOCAL NOMENCLATURE

 OF THE CLALLAM TRIBE.


 S'ng-o. A river running into the Strait of Fuca, above Neah Bay.

 Ok-ho. Another river near the last.

 Klat-lá-was. A village on the Strait.

 Pisht'st. Village at Canel River, Pillar Point.

 Kwa-há-mish. Fishing Station at Lyre River.

 El-wha. The village at the mouth of the Elkwa, west of Port Angeles.

 Tsi-whit´zen, Yin´nis. Villages at Port Angeles.

 Stét-lum. Village at New Dungeness.

 Shkwin. Village at Sequim Bay.

 Ká-kaitl or Skwá-kwel. Village at Port Discovery.

 Ká-tai. Lower village on Port Townshend.

 Chem´a-kum. Village site at head of do.




 VOCABULARY OF THE LUMMI.


 A.

 ABOVE, se-suk´tl.

 ADZE, s'chüm´mün.

 AFRAID, sái-sin.

 AFTER, il-kwâ-wüs.

 ALDER, skwang-l'tch.

 ALIVE, hal-ikh, hal-lé.

 ALL, makw, mokw.

 ALWAYS, wai, wa-hái, o-wái-la;
   _always so_, wa-hái-yu shüng angs.

 ANGRY, kwin-tün.

 ARM, ta´lo;
   _my arm_, n´ta´lo;
   _right arm_, si-lä-me´[=u]s;
   _left arm_, suk-kwe´[=u]s.

 ARROW, yitcht.

 ASHES, kwái-chp.

 AT, _to be at_, lä-si _or_ lak-si;
   _he is at Lummi_, lä-si la N[=u]kh-lüm´mi.
   _See also "live," "be."_

 AXE, ku´küm. (küm-müt, _to chop_.)


 B.

 BACK, _the_, stas-kwitl.

 BAD, h'äs, s'häs.

 BAG _or sack_, chu-kwal´.

 BAIL A BOAT, _to_, chi-kwást;
   (_in Simiamoo_), kwül´lüt.

 BALD, ko´a-lekw.

 BARK, _of the fir_, chül´li;
   _of the cedar_, sl-kwüm´.

 BASKET, _potato basket_, kl-päk;
   _load basket_, s'pi-chä;
   _small basket_, pep-chälkh.

 BEADS, _large blue kind_, shkwe´-kwün;
   _small white do._, tsüts-hüt;
   _small green beads_, tchi-kwül-lekh´.

 BE, _to_, _See "at," "live."_
   _It is in the house_, lâk-si á-lung.

 BEAR, _black_, schüt´hün;
   _grizzly_, kwe´chin.

 BEARD, kwin´s'n;
   _moustache_, kwinks.

 BEAVER, skül-láu.

 BEFORE (_in point of time_), kwül-hés-lüt-sin.

 BELLY, kwül´la, kläs.

 BELOW, kläkhl.

 BIRD, _water fowl_, mo´[=o]k;
   _small birds_, tséts-at-süm.

 BIRDS:
   Eagles, golden eagle, kwül´-lüng-sen;
     bald eagle, yükh-wül-la.
   Hawks, pa-áls, tsekhw-tsükhw, tül-kwe´mitl, tsi-ha-litsh;
     sparrow hawk, süs-so-wak-chil-la.
   Owls, great horned owl, che´-tüng-hu;
     small owl, kwai-el-hu.
   Woodpeckers, logcock, skwül-lüt´tün;
     flicker (_P. Mexic._) tse´a-k't;
     small woodpeckers, tsüt-tüng.
   Swift (_Cypselus_), kuk-sátch.
   Kingfisher, süs-she´la.
   Robins (_T. Naevius_), kwüs-kük'h;
     (_T. Migrat._), tsel-tcha.
   Warblers, hu-hwül-lüsh.
   Chickadee (_Parus_), ts-ka-yis.
   Finches (_generic_), tch-kwa´kwa;
     ground robin, tül-tülk-si-nün;
     snow finch, tchi-sa-wütsh.
   Wren, te´ti-tüm.
   Raven, sku-takh.
   Fish Crow, sku-kwa´ta.
   Blue Jay, chi-ya.
   Magpie, s'hün´nün.
   Pigeon, hüm-ókh.
   Ruffed Grouse, skwüts, skwüts´ha.
   Dusky Grouse, ng'e´et.
   Sand-hill Crane, slem.
   Plover, chit-hün-natsh´.
   Oyster Catcher (_hematopus_), swó-kük.
   Yellow-shank Snipe, skük-ka´-ye.
   Beach Birds, small snipe (_?generic_), pel-latsh, skeks.
   Curlew, mük-mük-kwa.
   Swan, ho´ha-han.
   Snow Goose, kla-wükh-han, kla-hwa´han.
   Canada Goose, ákh-ha.
   Brant (_Bernicla_), hül-hül´tsh, hül-hül´cha.
   Mallard (_a. Boschas_), ti-nük-sen.
   Teal (_Nettion_), hüs-natch, chil-si´set.
   Shoveller (_Spatula_), klel-lük-tük-sen.
   Gadwal (_Chaulelasmus_), shes´-sün-na.
   Sea Ducks (_generic_), kwal´-hu.
   Golden eye (_Clangula_), hül-hül-lül´o-witl.
   Canvass back (_Aythya_), hókh-ko-nitsh.
   Spirit Duck (_Albeola_), hekh-kün-né, k'k-hün´na.
   Merganser (_Mergus Am._), kwa-[=o]kw;
     (_Mergus Serrator_), sküm-mätsh.
   Cormorant, mäs-sitch.
   Gulls, large kinds, kwün-né;
     small kinds, skókh-kwa.
   Loons (_Colymbus_), swa´kwün, hwekhw-kwüs.
   Grebes (_Podiceps_), sk[=u]l-küls´, hwa´nitsh, hwüt-tis.
   Guillemot (_Uria_), sko-kwa-kwüts, ko-k[=o]kh-küts.

 BIRDS, _parts of_:
   Beak, nük´sünsh (v. _nose_).
   Wing, ki-ka´al, sk-ká-al.
   Feathers, stli-päl-kan, stakw.
   Quills, stli-käl.
   Down, skái-us.
   Tail, klap-ái-sin-itsh.
   Gall, müs-suns.
   Entrails, ük-khes.
   Gizzard, s'he´a-kwüns.
   Liver, t'ä-kas.
   Heart, tsä-li.

 BITE, _to_, tsing-ut-tüng.

 BLACK, nük-kikh.

 BLANKET, _feather blanket_ (_a native manufacture_), stüm-mo-whitl;
   _woollen do._, swâ-kwatl;
   _white blanket_, pe-kál-kwüt;
   _figured do._, nüt-sa´lo-wüt;
   _red do._, nu-kwim;
   _green do._, nük-chal-kwüt;
   _blue do._, chi-al-küt;
   _large dark blue do._, chil-tál-kwüt.

 BLAZE, _to_, hu-tâ-ku.

 BLIND, klä-litsh.

 BLOOD, säs-tchin.

 BLOW _with the breath_, _to_, pa´-hwt;
   _blow the nose_, _to_, nük-lüng-sin´na.

 BLUE, chi-á-lis;
   _pale_, ni-hwékw.

 BOARD, _planks_, sél-to.

 BOIL, _to_, kwül-lüs´.

 BONE, s[=o]m, s'ham.

 BORE, _to_, _as with a gimlet_, slük´-wüt, nük-slük´wüt.

 BOSOM (_female_), sküm´ma.

 BOW, tsá-cha-sen.

 BOWSMAN, _of canoe_, he´u.

 BOX _or chest_, kla-yüks.

 BOY, s'ch-chi-álkh, schi´atl, stet-látkl.

 BRACELETS, _of brass wire_, tsa-met-chin.

 BREAD, _baked_, tau´ükh.

 BREAK, _to_, (_broken_), ti-kwüt-tüng.

 BREAST (_chest_), tsüng´ütl.

 BRING, _to_, an-ákh-hu.

 BROAD, nükh-hwái-ük-w'tl.

 BROTHER, _elder_, shi-itlkh;
   _younger_, sái-tchin, ni-whâ-ka.

 BURN, _I_, chükw´ sin;
   _it is burning_, ch'yükw.

 BURY, _to_, (_to cache_), as-chá-nütl.

 BUY, _to_, (_to trade or barter_), hwái-üm;
   _I want to buy_, nus-whái-yüm, nus-klé-a-küng sül-kül´la (nus-klé,
       _I wish_).

 BYE AND BYE, o-wäs-hés.


 C.

 CANOE (_generic_), skwâlkh;
   _Chinook and Makah pattern_, üt-hüs, [=o]t-hüs;
   _small do._, kük-ho´ütl;
   _large Kawitchen canoe_, shwâ-atl;
   _small fishing canoe_, sno´wh'tl;
   _shovel-nosed or burden canoe_, klai.

 CARRY, _to_, süng-at´;
   _to carry on the back_, süng-áng;
   _on the shoulder_, ang-ut-tün;
   _in the hand_, wi-kwo-nat´.

 CEDAR, (_Thuja_), h'pai.

 CERTAINLY, _of course_, ho´wüs.

 CHALK (_properly a white diatomaceous earth used for cleaning skins_),
     stau´okw.

 CHIEF, si-ám.

 CHISEL, _of stone_, sh-we´ükh.

 CHOP WOOD, _to_, küm´müt.

 CLEAR SKY, shu-ewk'h-hu.

 CLEAR OFF, _to_, (_of the weather_), s'ai-yüt-tung;
   _it is clearing off_, ta-chil shu-auk-hu (_clear it comes_).

 CLOTH, _calico_, as-hálkh (_i.e. "figured"_);
   _domestics_, pük'h; (_white_);
   _baize_, tsats´a-whün;
   _flannel_, tsül´whüm.

 CLOUDS, spa´hu;
   _it is clouding over_, ta´chil nükh-no´-wüs.

 COALS _of fire_, chtist.

 COAL, _stone coal_, pe´chit.

 COAT, snu-éks.

 COLORS:
   White, pük´h.
   Black, nük-kikh.
   Red, n'sük'h, n'sükw.
   Blue, chi-á-lis;
     pale do., ni-hwekw.
   Yellow, n's-kwül-la-wün, nük-wái.
   Green, ni-tlut'h, nük-wái.

 COME, _to_, n'a, e-ná;
   _I come from Simiamoo_, si-tü-sin Si-mi-a-mu;
   _come with me_, nük-wá-shin-nus;
   _come into the house_, an-á-la we-lüng, _or_ an-ush-ta no é-lüng (a-lüng,
       _a house_);
   _come near_ (_imp._), n'at´la.

 COOK, _to cook on hot stones_, k'k'pak.

 COOKED, _it is cooked_ ("_done_"), kwül.

 COPULATE, _to_, sün-nókh.

 COUGH, _to_, ta´kwün.

 CRADLE, pat´süts.

 CRUSTACEANS:
   Crab, bes-kwu, ä-chükh.
   Spider Crab, ku-kwátl-shin.
   Stone Crab, ku-kwin-nó-wa.

 CRY, _I_, ho-ang´sün.

 COVER, _to_, kle-hwés-tüng.

 CUP, mem´tük'h.

 CUT _with a knife_, _to_, shipt.


 D.

 DANCE, _to_, koi-el´lish, kwi-é-lish.

 DARK, klatch.

 DAUGHTER, ng-ün´na.

 DAY, skwá-chil.

 DEAD, kwái-i, ko-áikh.

 DEEP, klütsh.

 DEER, smis, smé-is, h[=o]pt;
   _a buck_, ses´tün ("_horned_");
   _in Kawitchen_, hau-pa;
   _amongst the forest or "Stick" Indians_, klalk-ten-na.

 DIG, _to_, _roots in general_, pä-nükhw´, pän-hu;
   _potatoes_, si-a-kwáls;
   _fern roots_, tlai-ükw;
   _clams_, kükh-hül´la.

 DIRTY, tüng-hwäs´.

 DISHES, nu-wh'tsh-kwé-la.

 DOG, sko-mái, ská-ha.

 DON'T, kwe-ét.

 DOOR, _also road_, satl.

 DREAM, _to_, kül-kül-la´sin.

 DRESS _a skin_, _to_, e´ükh.

 DRINK, _to_, kâ-ko, nus-kâkh;
   _I drink_, kwa´kwa-sün.

 DRUM, _to_, _as in conjuring or at dances_, kau-ä´tüng.

 DRUNK, _foolish_, as-hwákw, äs-hwákw-tün.

 DRY, sel´-üp.

 DUCK, spl-häntl;
   _mallard_, ti-nük-sen;
   (_vide "birds."_)

 DULL, _as a tool_, kül-lás.


 E.

 EAR, kwül´lün.

 EAR RINGS, sklau-ün.

 EARTH, _the_, _land_, s'che-tung´a-whün, s'che-tüng-a-hüng;
   _earth_, _dirt_, sé-yük.

 EAT, _to_, it´lün, it´l'nkh;
   _I eat_, nit-sít-lin, it-lün-sün.

 ECHO, sän-gün.

 EGG, sn'lng-_á_nt, kwün-kwün-né.

 EIGHT, tas, tus-sä-la, tus-sält-hu.

 ELBOW, _or knee-joint_, kl-yüt-sé-tün.

 ELK, kwáu-watsh, ky-yétsh, kai-yéts.

 END, _the end of anything_, sä-ans.

 EVENING, t'tang´en.

 EVERY^1 THING^2, mükw^1 stang^2.

 EXCHANGE, _to_, i-yakt´.

 EYE, kül´lüng.

 EYEBROW, süng´ün;
   _one-eyed_, as-takws.


 F.

 FACE, sas.

 FAR, chakw, ch[=o]kw.

 FART, tük-snitch. _It is the common expression of disgust at anything,
     or any one._

 FAT, _adj._, tlet-lük.

 FATHER, män.

 FEATHERS, stá-kw, sl'pal´kan.

 FEMALE, slá-ne.

 FETCH, _to_, an-ákhw.

 FILE, _a_, clük-hün;
   _to file_, chük-kás.

 FIND, _to_, kwün´nüng.

 FINGERS, chi-hals´.

 FINGER RINGS, hi-a´lüm-chis.

 FIR TREE, chül-li-íltsh, chül-chils´;
   _fir bark_, chül-li.

 FIRE, chük-hós;
   _bring fire_, kwün-tatsh.

 FIRST, il-chä-la.

 FISH, ETC.:
   Cod, ait.
   Flounder, o´we.
   Herring, slang-üt.
   Calorhynchus, skwâ-ma.
   Large cottus, skün-nákhw.
   Skate, kákh-k[=o]kh.
   Oulakan (_thaleïchthys_), ti-a-ko-wa.
   Pencil fish, _a small fish that comes in schools_, katl.
   Salmon, _vide infra_.

 FISH, _parts of_:
   Scales, slés.
   Fins, ká-ting-üs.
   Tail, s'hüp-shin.
   Roe, he-a-hetl;
     herring roe, ché-mäsh.

 FISH WEIR, _large_, s'chi-yäk;
   _small do._, ti-k_á_p.

 FIVE, kl-kats, kl-kätch-sä-la, kütch-sält-hu.

 FLEA, tát-a-tlüm.

 FLESH, _meat_, slé-ükw.

 FLY, _a_, i-kwül´lüng, kwil-lüng.

 FOG, spi-á-hwün.

 FOOD, set-lün, sä-wün.

 FOOLISH, as-hwäkw.

 FOOT, s'hün´na.

 FOOT-PRINT, hün-nüug´en.

 FOREHEAD, skwang´us.

 FORMERLY, kwüt-li sil-la.

 FOUR, ng´oss, ni-s_á_-la, sält-hu.

 FRIEND, klé-nük-wil;
   _my friend_, n's-klé; (_literally, I like him_.)

 FULL, h[=e]ts.

 FUNDAMENT, kla-wákh.


 G.

 GAME (_beaver teeth dice_), smi´-la-li.

 GET, _to_, kwün´nüt;
   _I want^1 to get^2 pantaloons^3_, nus-klé-ük^1 kwün-nüt^2 sük-ké-üs^3;
   _get something to eat_, _fetch^1 food^2_, _imp._, kwün-nas-süng^1
       s'it-lün^2;
   _get into the canoe_, lä-ti kwüt-la-tsi ti shwá-atl; ái-ba kün
       slang´üt; (lä-tsi _seems to be "at" or "into;" vide "at" and
       "live;"_)
   _get fire wood_, _to_, tük-kütsh´.

 GIRL, st-hlá-ni, sln-chá-atl.

 GIVE, _to_, (_to give as a present_), üng-us;
   (_in the sense of "to help or to hand to,"_) klätch;
   _give it me_, an-ákhw, (_i.e. bring it._)

 GLOVES, ts'-kwá-lit-cha, no-sé-sin.

 GNAT, chetsks.

 GO, _to_, h'ya;
   _I go_, kwül-h'ya´-sün, yas-sin-sa;
   _I am going to Lummi_, yá-sin-kin N[=u]kh-lüm-mi;
   _presently I will go_, wi-a-sin-sa;
   _let us go_, is-tá;
   _go you_, _imp._, ho-ni-chitl'h;
   _go out_, _imp._, ské-lüng, ho-nes-ké-lüng (a-lung, _house_);
   _go there, a little further off_, yi-hé-wül-tül-lá.

 GOOD, aikh.

 GRAVE, _serious_, [=o]kw-hüm´.

 GRASS, s'hüs-sái.

 GREAT, hai-yikh´, ke-yikh´.

 GREEN, ni-tlüt´h, nük-wai.

 GREY HAIRED, süts-üm-mékhw.

 GUM, _resin_, _light wood_, smá-nitsh.

 GUN, _north west musket_, pú-yük (pu, _the sound of a gun_);
   _regulation musket_, yüm-k'sn;
   _rifle_, hai-choi-i-kütl;
   _double-barrelled gun_, nu-chüs´a-kun (chüssa, _two_);
   _pistol_, chi-chai-etl pú-yük (s'chi-chai-an, _an infant_);
   _revolver_, nün-hük-ün-ük-ün;
   _to load a gun_, h'nu-wül-lüs´sün;
   _to ram down the load_, sé-a-kün;
   _to fire a gun_, kwül-shül´la, (_Simiahmoo_) klüm-kwül´la.

 GUNPOWDER, kwälkh;
   _flints or caps_, kwül-län.


 H.

 HAIL, klüm-whái-la.

 HAIR, si-at´tün.

 HALF, kl-chükh´.

 HAMMER, _to_, h'kwüs´chis;
   _hammer_, _a_, s'kwüs´chis.

 HAND, sa´lüs.

 HANDLE, kült-shé-nün.

 HE, nekhl, nitlkh.

 HEAD, s-kwáng-i, skwâng-i.

 HEAR, _to_, chis´a-lan.

 HEART, st-sá-la, tsá-la.
   _In the sense of the mind_, h'ching-ing.

 HEAVY, hüm.

 HERE, ti-á-kwu.

 HIGH, ses'l.

 HONE, _or whetstone_, shu-táks.

 HOUSE, á-lüng;
   _the posts that support the roof_, k_á_-kan;
   _the ridge pole_, s'klüm-smelt-hu;
   _side plates_, ha´met-sin.

 HOW, _how shall I do it?_ swün-né-üng-set ti-á?

 HUNCHBACKED, sko-mé-sin.

 HUNDRED, nat´so-itch, nat´so-wütsh.

 HUNGRY, kwá-kwi.

 HUNTER, tsüm-á-mün-sa;
   _seal hunter_, nus-lám-ükh.

 HUNTING BAG, shit-t_á_-la.

 HUSBAND, n'stá-lush.


 I.

 I, us.

 ICE, s'lel-lokh, sé-ma.

 IN, _into_, nu-äs;
   _put in_, _imp._, nu-as´ ats-ches´sük;
   _to be at or in_, lak-si; _vide "live;"_
   _it is in the house_, lâk-si á-lüng.

 INDIANS, _people_, atl-tá-ling-hu.

 INFANT, s'chi-chái-an, kük-ké, n's-chái-in.

 IRON, küm-tüm´.

 ISLAND, kl-chas, s'kwüs-sá, sk'-sas.


 J.

 JEALOUS, s[=a]-si-si.


 K.

 KICK, _to_, lüm-mat´.

 KILL, _to_, k'châ-tükh, ku-chel´la.

 KISS, _to_, nükh-wh'm-kwóst.

 KNIFE, shpál-tin;
   _do. with one edge_, il-kákh-han;
   _two-edged_, wat-chä-han.

 KETTLE, _iron_, sklá-lup;
   _wooden_, sko´ten.

 KNOW, _to_, Do you know Ské-ükl? (_a man of that name?_) hüt-ché-tüs-hu
     Ské-ükl?


 L.

 LAKE, s'weltsh.

 LANCE, st-kwái-itch.

 LARGE, mokw.

 LAUGH, _I_, nün-nái-yüng-sen.

 LAZY, sä´hüng, sakhw;
   _I am lazy_, sa´whüng-sin.

 LEAF, s'chá-sün.

 LEAP, _to_, hwé-tüng.

 LEG, slá-hütsh, ská-kün;
   _calf of leg_, kátl-sün.

 LEND, _to_, ä-yil.

 LIAR, kai-yá-kan.

 LIE, _I_, hukh-kái-ya-kün.

 LIGHT, _adj._, stá-tu.

 LIGHTNING, cha-á-kwa-chük, cha-küts-o-kikh.

 LIKE, shün-ángs.

 LISTEN, _imp._, ni-hwú-i-yan.

 LIVE AT, _to_, läksi; (_this word appears to be the equivalent of the
     Nisqually_ at-suts, _and to be really an adverb signifying "presence"
     or "existence"_);
   _I live there_, läk-si tel-lá.

 LONG, _in dimension_, klä-kut.

 LOOK OUT! kwá-la.

 LOOKING GLASS, skwo-ná-süng, sku-ko-ná-süng, hu-ku-ná-sing;
   _the image or reflection in the glass_, kukh'-kütl.

 LOSE, _to_, ek-kwa.

 LOUSE, nüs´sün.

 LOVE, _to_, n[=u]s-tlé, nis-klé.


 M.

 MAGIC, _conjuring_, ch'si-ó-wün;
   _for medicine_, shi-nám.

 MAKE, _to_, chai;
   _what are you making?_ stang n's chai?
   _I am making a canoe_, chai its sno´hwütl;
   _make fire_, _imp._, chük-kós.

 MAMMALS:
   Horse, stük-ké-u.
   Elk, kwá-watsh, kai-yéts.
     buck, sist-ün, _i.e._ "horned."
   Deer, smé-yis.
     buck, sist-ün.
     fawn, stül-la.
   Bear, black, späs.
     grizzly, kwái-et-chin.
   Big horn (_ovis montana_), kwe-kwüt-chen.
   Mountain goat (_aploceras_), swét-le, pi-külkh-kan.
   Racoon, bl[=o]ps.
   Dog, skó-mai.
   Wolf, st'kái-ya.
   Cougar, shwo´wa.
   Lynx, sküts-a´müs.
   Beaver, skül-lá-u.
   Sea otter, tüm´müs.
   Land otter, s'katl.
   Seal, _á_ss´hu.
   Mink, kai-yakh, s'ché-a-kün.
   Weasel, kül-ké-la.
   Skunk, süp-pük.
   Squirrel (_sciurus_), tsip-si-á-sün.
   Striped squirrel (_tamias_), hwé-pe-chin.
   Kamass rat (_neotoma_), ná-wit.
   Mouse, kwa´tün.
   Mole, spi-lá-wün.
   Hare, ské-ka-was.

 MAMMALS, _parts of_:
   Neck, tatsh-süns.
   Atlas joint, kük-kak-w'chis.
   Ribs, lük-h'ws.
   Marrow of legs, tüts-üsh´shins.
   Brain, smet-küs.
   Gristle of vertebræ, kwa-á-lüs.
   Liver, stük´chüng.
   Lights, spül´hu.
   Paunch, spukh.
   Wind-pipe, hwang-ün.
   Tail, klo´wak-üs.
   Skin, kwül-los.
   A dressed skin, hül-la-kan.
   Hair, s'chais.
   Hoofs, kwâ-nüngs.
   Kidneys, sün-süns.
   Sinews of legs, kli-é-mins.
   Sinews of back, tüng-é-sens.
   Horns, tses´tün.
   Heart, tsá-la.
   Os calcis, kát-lin-süns.
   Thighs, kat-chat-chs.
   Saddle or hind quarters, as-satch-chatsh (chus-sa, _two_).
   Leg, sku-shüm-shins.
     Lower joint of do., s'hün-nüs.
   Fore quarter, tä-los.
     Both do., skül´la-hans.
   Fat, nas.
   Meat, slé-ük.

 MAN, swé-yi-ka.

 MANY, n'gann, n'gün;
   _many people_, n'günhl-tá-ling-hu;
   _I have many people_, n'gan al-tä-ling-hu ti-us.

 MAT, slä´wün;
   _the large mat used for making temporary lodges_, sá-letch;
   _cedar bark mat_, tsüm´müt, lo´kwai.

 MEND, _to_, chüts-ül-kwüt´tün.

 MERRY, nüks-né-ni.

 MIDDLE (_of length_), á-no-wüls.

 MISTAKE, _to_, _either in speech or on the road_, mäl-min.

 MOLLUSCS, RADIATES, ETC.:
   Small round clam (_Venus_), sküt-hlai;
     quahog (_Saxidomus_), sákh-hwa;
     large clam (_Lutraria_), swäm.
   Cockle (_cardium_), sk´läm.
   Mussel (_Mytilus_), klâ-küm.
   Oyster, klokh-klokh.
   Whelk, sük-kwái-yükh.
   Barnacle, süm-mai-ya.
   Chiton, hül´lüng.
   Land snail (_helix_), wük-kük'h.
   Slug (_limax_), kai-yat´lin.
   Sea egg (_Echinus_), skwét-si.
   Sea slug (_holothuria_), sekt.
   Star fish, kwül-lá-chi, kül-lä-sis.
   Cuttle fish, ské-m[=u]k.
   Shells, ká-ya-men.

 MOON, kl-káltsh.

 MORNING, skwá-chi.

 MOSQUITO, kwá-an.

 MOTHER, t[=a]n.

 MOUNTAIN (_same as rock_), sng-ánt.

 MOUTH, sá-sün.

 MOVE FARTHER, yi-hé-wül tül-lá;
   _go there_, tük´whist.

 MUCH, n'gun;
   _much food_, n'gün sét-lün.

 MYTHOLOGY:
   Ha-áls, _the principal super natural being, equivalent to_ Hun-né _of
       the Nisquallies_, No-kw-makhl _of the Clallams and Skagits, and_
       Iká-ni _of the Chinooks_.
   S'hui-áb, _or_ S'hui-ám, _the pre-human demon race_.
   Y[=u]tl-ma, _or_ Shwâ-mat-wun, _the spirit that presides over good
       fortune_.
   Ch'si´o-wün, _a particular gift or capacity acquired by fasting, etc.,
       or by incantation, similar to the Chinook tamánowas_.
   Shi-nám, _magic or medicine_.


 N.

 NAILS, t'sâls, chi-sá-lis.

 NAKED, klüt-säng.

 NAME, s'nä;
   _my name_, üs-nä. _Vide "who."_

 NAVEL, mük´h-hwoi-ye.

 NEAR, kl-ké-a-ke, tüt-lé-kai, sti-talst´.

 NEEDLE, chät´sün.

 NET, _for catching ducks, etc._, tük´hüm;
   _seine_, aukh-whói-yen.

 NEW, háu-wüs.

 NIGHT, snat.

 NINE, tük'hw, tük-whä-la, tük-whalt-hu.

 NO, a-wá, a-wükh´, ókh-wa.

 NONE, _there is none_, a-wün´na;
   _are you not ashamed?_ a-wün-na s'hét-sil? (_literally "no shame?"_)

 NOSE, nük´sün.

 NOSTRILS, skwá-lük-sen.

 NOW, ti-a, ti-an´k'h.

 NUMERALS:
   _Simple Cardinals--_
     1, nüt´sa.
     2, chüs´sa.
     3, klikhw.
     4, ng-oss´.
     5, kl-kats´.
     6, t'hünkh.
     7, tsákws.
     8, tats.
     9, tük'hw.
     10, o´pün.
     11, ó-pün it nüt´sa.
     12, ó-pün it chüs´sa.
     20, tsük-küs, tsük-wüs.
     30, kl-whl-shá.
     40, nüsl-shá.
     50, küts'hl-shá.
     60, tükh-hüm-shá.
     70, skwl-shá.
     80, tüsl-shá.
     90, to-wol-shá.
     100, nat-sa-wütsh.
     1000, o-päntsh.

   _Personal Cardinals--_
     1, nat´sa.
     2, chá-sa.
     3, kl-whái-la.
     4, ni-sä-la.
     5, hl'-katch-sä´la.
     6, tükh-hüng-ä-la.
     7, tsük-sä-la.
     8, tüs-sä-la.
     9, tük-hwä-la.
     10, o-pün-ä-la.
     20, nt-su-ku-sä-la.

   _Cardinals of Valuation--_
     1, tsak´wüt-hu.
     2, tch's-sält-hu.
     3, kl-whält-hu.
     4, sält-hu.
     5, kütch-sält-hu.
     6, tükh-hüng-ält-hu.
     7, sük-sält-hu.
     8, tüs-sält-hu.
     9, tük-whält-hu.
     10, o-pün-ält-hu.
     20, ts[=u]-kw-sält-hu.


 O.

 OAK, s'chüng-altsh.

 OFF SHORE, tâl.

 OLD, tsa-küng, snük-kái;
   _an old man_, as-á-lokh, as-mes´sün.

 ONE, nüt-sa, nat´sa, tsak´wüt-hu.

 OUT DOORS, sét-lüng (a´lüng, _a house_).


 P.

 PADDLE, _to_, ist.

 PAN, _or plate_, lä-sün.

 PANTALOONS, sük-ké-us.

 PENIS, shel-l_á_.

 PEOPLE, _i.e._ _Indians_, atl-tá-ling-hu;
   _people inhabiting the woods_, "_Stick Indians_," mäs-hwi (_whence the
       name of a tribe on Fraser River, generally known as Maskwies_);
   _people living on the salt water_, s'chit-lals´ha (klals, _the sea_);
   _River Indians_, chis-tá-lo, stül-tá-lo (stá-lo, _a river_);
   _white men_, hwa-ni´tum.

 PERHAPS, yükh-whá.

 PIGEON, h'mo, hüm-o'h.

 PIN, _a_, hüm-mén;
   _large blanket pin_, kwün-né-sing.

 PIPE, päkw.

 PLANE, _to_ (_boards_), shé-shüb; (_probably by onomatop[oe]ia_).

 PLANTS, ETC.: (_See also Trees._)
   Salmon berry, al-é-la.
   Barberry, skwâ-cha-sitsh.
   Red raspberry, tük´wüm.
   Gooseberry, küm-kwéltsh.
   Dewberry, skül-nu-whélsh
   Rose bush, kül-kél.
     Berries of do., kül-lük.
   Snowberry bush, pat-saltsh.
     Berries of do., p'pi-kái-yas.
   Honeysuckle, kat-kat-éltsh, saltsh; (_the leaves are chewed as a
       medicine_.)
   Spiræa, kads-sulch.
   Wild pea, hüm-kwai-á-sin.
   Wild rye, pshai.
   Yarrow (_Achillia multifolia_), pül-lé-a-kwütsh; (_it is used to
       expedite delivery_.)
   Prickly pear (_cactus_), tsä-ta.
   Thorns, chit-tüm-mäs.
   Equisetum, mäkhw, á-is-küd.
     Root of do., ko-ma-lokh.
   Cat-tail rush, s_á_-kün.
   Tule or round rush, skwül-lül.
   Wild onion, swél-nitsh.
   Brake fern, sük-ka-an´.
     Roots of do. (_eaten_), skwi´yu.
   Small brake, tsük´kwa.
   Wood fern, s'hä-lüm.
   Liquorice fern (_an expectorant_), klüs-síp.
   Lichens, küt-che.
   Spanish moss, stül-hái-is.
   Liverworts, mükh´tül-lüs;
     _a species of moss with a peppery taste, used in medicine_, kät-si.
   Sea weeds, chil-lüm.
   Kelp (_fucus gigantia_), kwá-ang.

 PLANT, _to_, chin-eng-ütl.

 PLENTY, n'gün.

 POINT _of anything_, i-sük´sin.

 POOR, _wretched_, sül-lá-wa.

 PORCUPINE QUILLS, tsüts-ül-kan.

 PORPOISE, kwá-nat.

 POSTS _for supporting the roof of a house_, kä-kan.

 POUND, _to_ (_as seeds, grain_), kli-a-kwéng-ütl.

 PRAIRIE, spelkh´han.

 PREGNANT, skä-kwi.

 PRESENTLY, hwa-sing-ang´a;
   _in a little while_, h'wes´ta-ál, hu-as-ta-al´.

 PRONOUNS:
   I, us;
     _suffixed to a verb_ (_copulative_), sün.
   My, ti-us;
     _prefixed to noun_ (_possessive_), n's, n[=u]s.
   Thou, nükw.
   Thy, ti-nük-wa.
   Thyself, tin-tsi-la.
   He (_that one_), nel, nitlh.
   We, minglkt, kl-ming´ülkh.
   Ye, nük-kwé-li-e.
   They, nan-etl-ya, kw-si-a-hal-tün.
   My canoe, nus-kwá n'shwâ-atl.
   Thy knife, süns-kwân's-päl-tün.
   His gun, tsä-ka po-yük.
   Our country, tsá-kwün tüng´-hu.
   Your house, tsüng a´nüng hä-la.
   Their father, k'sän män.

 PULL THE HAIR, _to_, heng-ükw-tün.

 PUT ON, _to_, _pantaloons_, hük-éw-sing;
   _a coat_, hut-ché-tüng.

 PUT INTO, _to_, _imp._, nu-ás ats-ches-sük.

 PUT DOWN, _to_, sä-kws.


 R.

 RAIN, slüm´m[=o]kh.

 RAISE UP, _to_, sä-at.

 RAKE, _for taking herring and other small fish_, tlet´ha-men.

 RAPID, _in a river_, kwet´chüm.

 RAW, hets.

 RED, n'sük'h, n'sükw.

 RELATIONSHIPS:
   Father, män.
   Mother, tän.
   Husband, my, n'stá-lüsh.
   Wife, _idem_.
   Son or daughter, ng'ün´na.
   Brother, _if older than the speaker_, shí-itlh;
     _if younger_, sái-tchin.
   Elder sister, á-lish;
     _younger do._, sái-tchin.
   Grandfather, cha-mok.
   Grandmother, sé-la.
   Uncle, latl, hai'tch; (_as the nephew grows older, the uncle becomes
       an elder brother_.)
   Aunt, shé-ilsh.
   Father-in-law, slätl.
   Mother-in-law, _idem_.
   Brother-in-law, _idem (?)_.
   Sister-in-law, s'ng-at´hwun.
   Sister's husband, _idem_.
   Step father, n's-gnä-ün.
   Step mother, _idem_.
   Daughter-in-law, skwá-lo-wis.
   Husband's other wives, sái-ya.

 RIVER, stá-lo;
   _small stream_, stá-ta-lo.

 ROAD, satl.

 ROAST, _to_, _in ashes_, tül-lák;
   _on a stick_, s'kwül´lüng.

 ROCK, sng-ánt.

 ROPE, hwé-lüm.

 RUN, _to_, kwâ-nüng-üt, kwá-nüng-it.


 S.

 SAD, hätl-tin, hütch-ing´én.

 SAIL, _make sail_, _imp._, chai-a-kwün pa-kwün;
   _take in sail_, _imp._, klüng-äs.

 SALAMANDER, pét-h'yil.

 SALMON, _generic_, s'chän-hu.--
   _Various species:_
     kütch´küs _Salmo scoulerí_, RICHARDSON;
     hün-nün, _the hump-backed salmon_ (_S. Proteus_);
     sük-ké (_not ascertained_);
     yó-mutsh, _S. quinnat_, RICH.;
     kwal-hu, _S. canis_, SUCKLEY (_this name, it will be noticed, is
         also applied to sea ducks_);
     ké-ükh, _S. truncatus_?
     kwül-yauk, _salmon when exhausted by spawning_;
     tüghs, _salmon trout_ (_S. Campbelli_, SUCKLEY);
     su-kwái, _brook trout_ (_S. stellatus_, GRD.);
     hu-má-ni, _salmon fry._ (_This last word suggests the Spokane word
         for the brook trout_, hu-má-na.)

 SALT, klat´lün.

 SAND BEACH, s'het (_Lummi_), si-et´süm (_Kwantlen_).

 SAND SPIT, na-wa-létsh.

 SCOOP, _for bailing a canoe_, tsang´tün.

 SCRAPE, _to_, ekht.

 SCRATCH, _a_, si-héks.

 SCRATCH, _to_, hüt-ché-tüng;
   _I scratch_, hi-kék-sün.

 SEA, klals, kt'hlals.

 SEASONS:
   Spring, tchin-kwé-lis, tchin-kwai-lus.
   Summer, kwá-lus (kwá-lis, _warm_) tchin-é-yi.
   Autumn, chits-at-lin, tsa-whéngst.
   Winter, chints-é-hüm, chin-sá-tütsh, sá-titsh.

 SEE, _to_, lang-üt, lang-it.

 SELL, _to_, hwi-mä´la.

 SEVEN, tsâkws, tsük-sä-la, sük-sält-hu.

 SEW, _to_, chets.

 SHAKE HANDS, _to_, kwün-sest´.

 SHALLOW, shái-shüm.

 SHARP, ái-yas.

 SHARPEN, _to_, _to whet on a stone_, t'kas.

 SHAWL, süt-sá-müsh.

 SHIRT, küts-á-lis;
   _"hickory" shirt_, hütl-pé-wün.

 SHOES, _moccasins_, s'klük´a-shin.

 SHOOT, _to_, _with a bow_, ts-män.

 SHOT, hüs-üm-ákw.

 SICK, s'hatl.

 SICK, _I am_, s'hal'sün.

 SING, _to_, t'e-lüm, te´lim.

 SISTER, _elder_, á-lish;
   _younger_, sái-tchin.

 SIT, _to_, üm-müt, üm-mit, tsüm-má-no.

 SIX, t'hünkh, tükh-hüng-ä-la, tükh-hüng-ält-hu.

 SKIN, _dressed_, hül-kün;
   _un-dressed_, kwül´lo.

 SKY, sé-ishl, skwái-yil.

 SLEEP, _to_, ét-t-t, é-tüt-tüt, i-tit.

 SLEEPY, a-tá-tüng.

 SLOWLY, o-s'n-ang'h.

 SMALL, mi-mé-min.

 SMELL, _a_, häkw.

 SMELL, _to_, hük-kwül´la, hük-kwá-li.

 SMOKE, _to_, _a pipe_, smä-nis-tin (smá-nüsh, _tobacco_);
   _as a fire_, spát-lüng.

 SNAKE, s'alkh´ka.

 SNEEZE, _to_, hä-sing.

 SNORE, _to_, hwá-na-küng.

 SNOW, ná-ka.

 SON, ng-üu´na.

 SOUL, _the_, sül-lé.

 SOUR, sá-han.

 SOW, _to_, _grain_, _&c._, chái-its (chai, _to work_).

 SPEAK, _to_, kwal.

 SPEAR, _to_, _water fowl_, t'kwa´-nüm;
   _seals_, sái-yüm-mün;
   _fish_, t's-hüng´ün.

 SPLIT WOOD, _to_, sküt.

 STAB, _to_, met-át-üng-kwa;
   _Simiamoo_, ti-chet´üng-kwa.

 STAND, _to_, sít-lün.

 STAR, kó-s'n, kâ-s'n.

 STAY, _I will stay_, a-wüs-sin.

 STEAL, _I stole_, as-kwa-kan´;
   _you stole_, nük´wa kwa-kan´;
   _he stole_, nikhl-kwa-kan´.

 STEER, _to_, chün-nä-set; chük-ke-nüng.

 STEERSMAN, _of canoe_, as-kwá-at.

 STOCKADE, _fence_, kül-lükh´han.

 STONE, chet-hlákh;
   _rock_, sng-ánt.

 STOP, _I will stop here_, o-at´la-sün (_perhaps "I have arrived"_);
   _stop_, _imp._, _i.e. stop doing any thing_, un-nükhw kwá-tün s'chai;
   _stop_ (_when one is helped sufficiently to food_), hái;
   _stop_ (_talking_), süm-mukh.

 STRIKE, _to_, _with the fist_, nüt-sás-tüng.

 STRIPED, as-hé-ütsh.

 STRONG, kâm-küm, kwüm-kwüm.

 STURGEON, skwá-wütsh.

 SUN, sku-kül´.

 SWEET, sak-küng (aikh, _good_).

 SWIM, _to_, tüng-a-áng.


 T.

 TAKE, _to_, kwün´nut (_same as to get_).

 TAKE OFF, _to_, kl_á_-lis, klüt-sang´.

 TALE, _story_, skwül´kwül.

 TALL, kl'k-tákhl.

 TEETH, chin´nis.

 TEN, o´pün, o-pün-ä-la, o-pün-ält-hu.

 TESTICLES, má-tchin.

 THANK YOU, hekh.

 THAT, tül-lá, ta-lé;
   _that is Lucy's_, la Lucy ti-lé.

 THERE, ta-lá;
   _there it is_, e-i-té-i-ti, át-la-ti.

 THEY, nan-étl-ya, kw'si´a-hál-tün.

 THING, _things_, stang;
   _every thing_, nükw-stang.
   _It is noticeable that in this language, as well as in the Nisqually,
       Chinook, and probably in others, the word for "thing" is the same
       as that for "what."_

 THIEF, kán-kan.

 THIS, ti´et-hla.

 THOU, nükw;
   _thyself_, tin-tsi´la;
   _you are a Kanaka yourself_, Kanaka tin-tsi´la.

 THOUSAND, o-pántsh.

 THREAD, _twine_, hwé-lum.

 THREE, klikhw, kl-whái-la, kl-whält-hu.

 THROAT, haung´en.

 THROW, _to_, _as a stone_, tsi-lakh;
   _to throw away_, hwélt-hu.
   (_In the Simiamoo dialect_, é-kwüt; _to throw away with violence_,
       tim-müt.)

 THUMB, süs-táls.

 THUNDER, s'hó-hwas.

 TIDES:
   Flood tide, küm´mül.
   Ebb tide, hi-klatl'h.
   High tide, küm-küm´mül.
   Low tide, sham´shüm.

 TOBACCO, smá-nüsh.

 TOBACCO POUCH, smá-na-shá-la.

 TO-DAY, ti-a-káis, ti-o-skwá-chil.

 TOES, s'chüs'sün, snó-hwl-shin.

 TO-MORROW, kwá-chil, kwái-ikhl.

 TONGUE, té-whls.

 TRADING HOUSE _or store_, shwui-mäl (hwi-mä-la, _to sell_).

 TREES, _forest_, s'ki-lá-lüng-hu.

 TREES, ETC.:
   Red pine (_P. ponderosa_), kwa-kwa-yé-la-hilp.
   Dwarf pine (_P. contorta_), kwákhwl-ch.
   Spruce fir (_Abies Menzesii_), chi-kwüt´lp.
   White fir (_A. grandis_), sko´-me-yüks.
   Hemlock spruce (_Abies ---- ----_), s'ke-éltch.
   Yew, tlng-kálsh.
   Cedar (_Thuja_), h'chá-chiltsh.
   Red cedar (_Juniperus_), pits-in-ái-ilp.
   Arbutus (_A. Menzesii_), k[=o]-kwéltsh.
   Trailing arbutus (_A. uva-ursi_), kwün-neltsh; _the leaves of this
       vine are used for smoking_.
   Birch, kats-ül´tch.
   Maple (_A. macrophylla_), küm´ an-ilp.
   Vine maple (_A. circinata_), shé-chülp.
   Alder, s'kwáng-ültsh.
   Crab apple tree, kükh-whétsh.
     Fruit of do., ka-ákhw.
   Elder, tsé-wükh.
   Willow, swül-létsh.

 TREES, _parts of_:
   Roots, ko´mel-lokh.
   Fir cones, ta-má-ku-küns.
   Pitch or rosin, smá-nitsh.
   Leaves, sats-tlá.
   Fir bark, t'chül-le.
   Cedar bark, shl-k[=o]m.
     Inner bark of do., skwekhw.
   Willow bark (_used for making seines_), swá-lakh.
   Rotten wood, pi-kwái.

 TWO, chus-sa, chá-sa, tch's-sält-hu.


 U.

 UNCOVER, _to_, küt-lést.

 UNDERSTAND,--
   _I understand that_, hüt-che-tu ti-ats;
   _I don't understand_, o-ná kwins-hu-chet;
   _Do you understand Clallam?_ hüt-che-tüt kwüs-sa N[=u]s-klái-y[=u]m?

 URINATE, ché-wa. (_This applies to either sex, there not being a
     distinction made, as in the Nisqually._)


 W.

 WALK, _to_, s-tüng, sh-tüng.

 WANT, _to_, sklé;
   _I want_, n's-klé;
   _I don't want_, á-wa sins-kle.

 WARM, kwass, kwá-lüs.

 WARRIOR, nus-chang-kün, mich-kül´lo-wütl.

 WASH, _to_, (_the hands_), tsük-sé-sümg;
   (_the face_), tsük-wá-süng;
   (_clothes_), tsük-ül-kwo´-tüng;
   _I wash_, sa-kwüm´sün.

 WATER, kaukh.

 WAVES, skwüt-la-lák-ün.

 WE, ninglkh, kl-ning-ülkh.

 WET, klük-sét, tsa-müng.

 WHAT, stäng, stäng-wüt;
   _what is that?_ stang ti-á?
   _what are you doing?_ stang nis-chai?
   _what food do you buy?_ stang kwa chats sä´wun?
   _what?_ (_in answer to a call_), stang?
   _what is the matter with you?_ es-tang hat-su?
   _what do you want?_ stang sins-kle ti-nük-wa;
   _what is your name?_ (_vide "who."_)

 WHERE, a-hén;
   _where is my gun?_ t'hén-ku ken po-yük?
   _I don't know where_, kwá-hen ish-tük´ka;
   _where do you come from (whence you?)_ tsa-héns-hu, tsa-hénts-hu?
   _where are you going (whither you?)_ t'whéns-hu, twéntst-hu?

 WHISTLE, _to_, sh-pi-lás.

 WHITE, pük'h.

 WHO, wät, wat;
   _who did that?_ wat´la kwuts-chái-a ti-a?
   _what (literally "who") is your name?_ wat-tun-má? wat kud sna?

 WIFE, n'stá-lush (_same as husband_).

 WIND, st-châng.

 WINDS:
   West, ste-wüt.
   W. N. W., tent-sa-lük.
   N. W. and North, s'chá-yüm.
   S. S. E., skang-üt.
   S. W., s'chis.

 WINGS, sk-käl.

 WIPE, _to_, (_the face_), nu-hwa-chá-süng;
   (_the hands_), chékw-sim.

 WOLF, st-kái-ükh.

 WOMAN, slá-ni.

 WOOD, s'chütl;
   _a log_, kwt-hlái;
   _dry wood_, stä-ta-chi.

 WORK (_do_, _make_), chái.

 WORTHLESS, kl-hül-o-_á_s.

 WRESTLE, _to_, tsäl-tüng.

 WRITE, _to_, hül´lüt.


 Y.

 YAWN, _to_, we´a-küs.

 YE, YOU, nük-kwé-li-é.

 YELLOW, n's-kwül-la-wün, nük-wai.

 YES, a-áh;
   _yes indeed, certainly_, ho´wüs, hu´üs, si-[=e]t

 YESTERDAY, chi-lak'hl.

 YOUNG, s'hwé-wils.




 LOCAL NOMENCLATURE

 OF THE LUMMI TRIBE.


 Chil-tün-nüm. Point Roberts.

 No-ku-me´khil. A creek running into the bay.

 Pi-kalps. The Indian village of Camp Simiamoo.

 Sim-i-a´mu. The name of the band.

 Kul-la´han. "Stockade," the site of the old village.

 A´la-la. Creek at the head of Drayton harbor.

 Se´litsh. The site on the sand spit of ditto. The name Tsi-he´lis has
     the same signification.

 Kw[=u]d-shäd. Mount Baker.

 H[=o]l-h[=o]l-ok'h. Site between Drayton harbor and Birch bay.

 Tsáu-wükh. Site on Birch bay.

 Tut-si-nüts. Slái-ek-sen. Sandy point.

 Cháu-üks. North end Lummi island.

 St'kwäp. A site on eastern side of do.

 Ska´lek-shün. Fishing on west side of do.

 Mam-e´ük _or_ S'müm-mé-ük. The mountain on south end of do.

 Klé-kwa-ni. A rock off S. W. end of ditto. It is a s'hui-yáb or demon.

 To-whütsh. Eliza island.

 Ku-kwa-né-üng. Viti rocks.

 Chá-chu-sen. Part of the Delta of Lummi river.

 Skül-há-netl, Sla-yüks. Mouths of the river on Hale's passage.

 Tom-whik-sen. The winter village on the passage.

 Tä´la-pi. Another neighboring site.

 Sw[=u]l-é-sen _or_ S'h[=u]l-e-sen. The Portage.

 N-[=u]s-ká-la-hüm. The neck of Point Francis.

 Sé-liss. Point Francis. (_Vide_ Sé-litsh, _supra._)

 Klik-a-té-nus. The small prairie at the military station, Fort Bellingham.

 Kwal-lu-h[=u]m (Squallicum). The small creek above Whatcom.

 What-com. The outlet of the lake. The name refers to the noise of its
     waters.

 Si-h[=o]m. The site of the Bellingham Bay Coal Mine.

 Ma-mó-si. Pattle's claim.

 Sis´lit-chüm. Thomas's claim.

 Tai-chá-mish. The cove at Cullum's claim.

 Tchük-a-nüts. The inner bight of Bellingham bay.

 S'hüts-küs. Point William, or Samish point.

 As-é-a-kün. Samish village behind the island.

 Pen-[=u]kh-hu. Vendovi island. The name is derived from that of a
     bulbous root growing there.

 T'châ-kwil-la. N. W. point of Gueymes island.

 T'kwâ-wa-tchin. N. E. side of do.

 Kwil-shants. S. E. point of do.

 N[=u]kh-whai-i-mikhl. Samish village S. W. side of do.

 Tál-la-lokh, Nu-kwüt-lá-al. Localities on Fidalgo island.

 Mük-kük'hs. N. E. point of do.

 Sküt-lüs. Sinclair island.

 Tüt-sékh. Cypress island.

 Tütl-ki-té-nüs. Strawberry harbor on do.

 Shé-üng-tl'h. The peak on the N. end of do. It is the nest of the
     thunder bird.

 S'n[=u]k-nokh-hw'tl. Site on western side of Blakely island.

 N[=u]s-kwi-chen´nüm. James's island.

 Chis-si-ná-a. Bird rocks off Decatur island.

 Hüt-tát-ch'l. Site of Indian village on S. E. end of Orcas island.

 Ko-pé-tün. S. E. point of eastern bay in Orcas island.

 M[=u]k-kw[=u]l-nitch. Small lake and cascade emptying into the eastern bay.

 I-ukh´kan. The cove at M[=u]k-kw[=u]l-nitch.

 Chin-chin-tsé-l[=u]ng. A rock on the eastern shore of the bay. It was
     another demon--a woman who committed adultery with every one. She
     was turned into stone by Ha-áls, but her spirit remains. She used to
     live at that place in summer, but went up the bay in the winter.

 N[=u]kh-whái-y[=u]m. Deadman's rock in the eastern bay. An old cemetery
     of the Lummi Indians.

 Tsül-whé-sün. A site at the head of the bay.

 Swá-lakh. Mount Constitution, on Orcas island. The name is also given to
     the eastern bay itself, or rather to the country upon it.

 S'ko-ma-ang. A mountain on the peninsula between the eastern and middle
     bays. The name refers to a berry called _t'kwa´ma_, and means "_like
     that berry_."

 A´la-la, "_like a house_," from _a´lung_, "_a house_." Another hill on
     Orcas island. The name also applies to the land bordering on the
     middle bay.

 N[=u]s-kül-ling-üs. The point at the entrance of the middle or A´la-la bay.

 Skwék-sen. A rock on the eastern side of do. This was another demon.

 I´ye-hün. The bald hill at the head of A´la-la bay.

 T'kai-yetsh. The extreme S. W. point of Orcas island.

 Nukh-ló-kwoi. A site on the W. side of do.

 Kwi-nüs. N. point of Lopez island.

 Sklél-nip. Sand point N. end of do.

 Nu-chad-kwun. E. point of do.

 S'whül-lütsh. The lagoon on the W. side of do. (Its Clallam name,
     _Pal-pi-yu_.)

 K[=u]t-ül´la. E. point of Shaw's island.

 Hüs-sáltsh, Hwi-chá-sen. Localities on the S. side of do.

 Kl-chang. Point on N. side do.

 N[=u]k-pá-katsh. Rocky islet N. side do.

 Kla-lá-ka-mish. Former inhabitants of the E. side of San Juan island; a
     band of Lummis now extinct.

 Si-a´lüng-hu. Hudson's Bay farm, San Juan island.

 Wa-hül-a-nün. Hudson's Bay salmon house, San Juan do.

 Kl-whái-ten. Patos island.

 Klakhw-küm (_mussels_). Patos island.

 Pen-[=o]kh. Matia group. The name has the same signification as that of
     Vendovi island.

 Chu-shé-nüng. Sucia group.

 Si-lá-ka-mish. Spiedur island.

 Kwün-nüs. Stuart island.

 S'Hün-ne. Waldron island.

 Le-mäl-tcha, Stä-shum. Former villages on Waldron island.

 El-t'nlh. Point Disney, do.

 Pl-hunk'-'sun. W. point, do.




 NAMES OF LUMMI CHIEFS.


 Sa-h[=o]p-kan, now dead.

 Chil-lük, his son, also dead.

 Cháu-its-h[=u]t, another son, and

 Chil-lé-ük.

   The last is Chief of the North Lummis, and Cháu-its-h[=u]t of the
   southern band.

 Hu-té-sa-lük, at Simiamoo.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Alphabetical Vocabularies of the
Clallum and Lummi, by George Gibbs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARIES ***

***** This file should be named 22228-8.txt or 22228-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/2/2/22228/

Produced by David Starner, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
